## Correlation of Primary and Secondary Motor Symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease to the DREAM Challenge Dataset
Parth Shah2, R. Sahiti Pudota1, Miad Faezipour1, Ph.D., Jani Macari Pallis, Ph.D.1  
University of Bridgeport, 221 University Ave, Bridgeport, CT 06604 1, (UB Alumni)2

## Summary Sentence
Acceleration, distance, number of steps, distance per step and signal energy (sum of the squares of the signal amplitudes) are calculated to determine how the primary and secondary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease can be identified using the Parkinson's Disease Digital Biomarker DREAM Challenge [1] datasets.

## Background/Introduction
In early 2016, Pallis and Faezipour received seed funding from the University of Bridgeport to conduct research with two biomedical engineering graduate students [2] who subsequently published their master’s theses on the creation of a Smart-Phone data collection application for gait and fall detection [3] and the use of classification schemes within MATLAB to analyze that data for fall detection [4]. As part of that project, the group examined (but did not analyze) datasets from PhysioNet [5] for gait and falls and recognized that the Smart-Phone and MATLAB applications under development could also be extended to recognize and classify (differentiate): a) motor symptoms of different diseases, b) specific disease progression [6] and c) progression of rehabilitation measures.
Subsequent work conducted with Shah [7] utilized an Arduino microcontroller (instead of a Smart-Phone) to collect accelerometer data with plans to extend this application to a Raspberry Pi mini-computer which would analyze the data in real-time.
The analysis of accelerometer data and quantification of ranges of data that signified a “fall” - rapid acceleration in the z- axis down direction, with an abrupt stop (deceleration) and small bounce in z-axis up direction, provided experience in identifying, correlating and classifying the collected data with the physical significance of primary motor motions.
For this challenge, the team has identified the primary and secondary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease and identified how acceleration, distance, number of steps, distance per step and signal energy (signal amplitude squared) relate to these symptoms.

## Methods
While every individual may not experience and exhibit the same symptoms, one or more of the primary and possibly secondary motor symptoms may be present. The specific primary motor symptoms focused on within this work have been bradykinesia (slow movement), rigidity, posture instability; and the specific secondary motor symptoms investigated which could potentially be distinguished, are freezing and festination (uncontrollable acceleration) [8].
Bradykinesia or “slow movement” can manifest itself as short shuffling walking steps. Examination of the number of steps and distance for a specific timeframe could indicate this symptom. Using data from pedometer_walking_outbound.json.items, the average distance/step was calculated. The data also included standard 12-step walk, an 18-step walk, and a 24-step walk. The Average Distance is the average of these three averages.
Rigidity may be indicated from accelerometer data. Individuals with rigidity and bradykinesia may not swing their arms while walking. This can be quantified by the magnitude of the values of the accelerometer data and distance/step.
Minimum and maximum acceleration is calculated from the accelerations in the x, y, and z directions (squaring each term, summing the three terms and then taking the square root of the sum). The Minimum Acceleration is the lowest value and the Maximum Acceleration is the highest value for that individual's record.
Unwanted accelerations are a secondary motor symptom. This may manifest itself with an uncontrollable acceleration and can result in a fall. Using the mPower data a significant change in the z-axis magnitude may indicate a fall. Also the pedometer data may indicate an increased acceleration in the x-axis direction.
Postural instability may manifest itself with a backward fall. There is potential to quantify this through the examination of the accelerometer data. The x- axis (translational motion) would have values in the negative (backwards) direction. The y-axis (lateral) may have values, which are greater in magnitude indicating a fall.
Minimum Acceleration, Maximum Acceleration, Difference Timestamp, Signal energy X, Signal energy Y, Signal energy Z are all calculated from accel_walking_outbound.json.items. The signal energy in the x, y and z directions was calculated from the sensor values and calculated as the amplitude squared. The Difference Timestamp is the difference between the maximum acceleration - timestamp of minimum acceleration. Thus, in some cases we see a negative number as the Difference Timestamp. This timestamp was derived from the actual data given in the dataset.
The Average Distance and Pedometer Standard Deviation are calculated from pedometer_walking_outbound.json.items and the Resting average acceleration is derived from the accel_walking_rest.json.items.
The feature matrix generated from our code (https://github.com/parth8891/MPowerData) includes nine features: Feature 1: Minimum Acceleration, Feature 2: Maximum Acceleration, Feature 3: Difference Timestamp, Feature 4: Average Distance, Feature 5: Resting Average Acceleration, Feature 6: Signal Energy X, Feature 7: Signal Energy Y, Feature 8: Signal Energy Z, and Feature 9: Pedometer Standard Deviation. The .csv file has the record ID as the first column, followed by the 9 features above.

## Conclusion/Discussion
Based on preliminary visual inspection of the resulting extracted features, we conclude that Average Distance and Pedometer Standard Deviation as well as Resting average acceleration appear to be the most informative features as clear variations of these values exist among different patient classes. As a future direction, machine learning, pattern recognition and classification techniques such as Support Vector Machines (SVM) [9] and deep learning [10],[11] will be employed to determine the performance of our method in terms of accuracy measures. Principle component analysis (PCA) [12] will also be applied to reduce the complexity, find the most discriminating features and further improve the performance of classifying patients with primary and secondary motor symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease.

## References
[1] Parkinson's Disease Digital Biomarker DREAM Challenge (syn8717496)  
[2] Vuligonga, Lavanya, Donthula, Prithi, Pallis, Jani and Faezipour Miad, Gait Balance Detection and Analysis Using Smart-Phone Application, Faculty Research Day, University of Bridgeport, April, 2016.  
[3] Donthula, Prithi Laxmininarayana, Gait Balance Detection, Master’s Thesis, University of Bridgeport Biomedical Engineering Department, May 2016.  
[4] Vuligonga, Lavanya, Classification of Gait Patterns in MATLAB, Master’s Thesis, University of Bridgeport Biomedical Engineering Department, May 2016.  
[5] Physionet, https://www.physionet.org/physiobank/database/#gait  
[6] Frenkel-Toledo, Giladi, Nir, Peretz, Chava, Herman, Talia, Gruendlinger and Hausdorff, Jeffrey, Effect of Gait speed on gait rhythmicity in Parkinson’s disease, variability of stride time and swing response time respond differently, Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 2005, 2:23, https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-2-23  
[7] Shah, Parth, Pallis, Jani and Faezipour, M., Automatic Gait Balance Detect System, Annual IEEE Connecticut Conference on Industrial Electronics, Technology and Automation (CT-IETA 2016)*1  
[8] Parkinson’s Disease Foundation, Symptoms, http://www.pdf.org/symptoms.  
[9] R. K. Begg, M. Palaniswami and B. Owen, Support vector machines for automated gait classification, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, Vol. 52, No. 5, pp. 828-838, 2005.  
[10] J. Ngiam, A. Khosla, M. Kim, J. Nam, H. Lee and A. Y. Ng, Multimodal deep learning, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1–8, 2011.  
[11]. X. Glorot, A. Bordes and Y. Bengio, Domain Adaptation for Large-Scale Sentiment Classification: A Deep Learning Approach”, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 1v8, 2011.  
[12] N. Kambhatla and T. K. Leen, Dimension Reduction by Local Principle Component Analysis, Neural Computation, MIT Press, Vol. 9, pp. 1493–1516, 1997.  
*1 Awarded best poster for master’s students

## Authors Statement
P. Shah and R. S. Pudota were extensively involved in writing the Python codes to deal with the dataset tables and to extract the features. M. Faezipour guided the team on signal interpretation, analysis and feature extraction. J. M. Pallis developed this response document and assisted in relating Parkinson's motor symptoms to the Challenge data. All authors have read and approved the final documents and files.
